# stryke

Fish entrained through hydroelectric facilities are exposed to turbine passage mortality stressors. Mortality through hydroelectric turbines has been well studied, with mathematical models able to predict the probability fish will get struck by a turbine blade (Von Raben 1957, Franke et al. 1997). The rate at which fish are entrained (fish per million [M] cubic feet [ft3] of water) through hydroelectric facilities is also a well-studied phenomenon, with results from field trials contributing to an entrainment database compiled by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI 1997). The 1997 EPRI database contains observations of 70 species at 43 facilities east of the Mississippi River. The EPRI dataset is particularly useful for quantitative analysis based on the assumption that when entrainment counts are standardized by discharge across facilities and holistically observed, the database will provide a reasonable estimate of entrainment rates for a watershed of a given size that are suitable for decision making purposes.  Also, by describing entrainment rates with statistical distributions and simulating with Monte Carlo methods, it is possible to estimate average daily entrainment and mortality with measures of certainty, as well as estimating the likelihood an event of a given size will occur. 

Simulated fish migrate through a hydroelectric project where passage routes are described with a directed acyclic graph. We assume all simulated fish will move downstream as they approach the project. If fish survive their current node, they can move to the next one. If there is more than one node available at their current location, then Monte-Carlo role of the dice and a priori determined transition probabilities control their movement. The simulation ends for a fish when it arrives at the last node in the network or dies.

For fish passing via entrainment, individuals are exposed to turbine blade strike, which is modeled with the Franke et al. (1997) equations. For fish that pass via passage structures or spill, mortality is assessed with a roll of the dice using survival metrics determined a priori, sourced from similar studies, or from expert opinion. The Franke et al. (1997) equations calculate the probability a fish of a given length will get struck by a turbine runner blade. With these equations, if we know how long a given fish is, the amount of discharge of through the turbine, the type of turbine, how many blades, and how fast it is rotating, then we can calculate with certainty the probability of being struck. Therefore, the only morphometric parameter needed to assess blade strike is length. All other input parameters are sourced from technical drawings of the facility.   

This procedure will guide the end user through an assessment of entrainment effects at a hydroelectric facility.  Stryke has two modes of operation for two different types of desktop entrainment studies: (1) it can be used to assess survival of anadromous species as they migrate past a facility (or series of facilities), and (2) estimate entrainment rates and survival of native species to assess population level impacts attributed to entrainment through a hydroelectric station.    

